An introduction to First Samuel.
In the original Hebrew canon,
First and Second Samuel were one volume.
The writing is attributed to the prophets
Samuel, Gad, and Nathan,
Samuel penning the first 24 chapters.
First Samuel covers a period
of just over 100 years,
from about 1180 to 1078 B.C.E.,
roughly when the writing was completed.
The book is largely
about four leaders in Israel
—High Priest Eli, the prophet Samuel,
King Saul, and David.
In chapter 1, a barren woman named Hannah
begs Jehovah for a son,
promising to devote him to God’s service.
God answers her prayer.
When her child, Samuel, is weaned,
she places him in the care of High Priest Eli
in Shiloh.
In chapter 3,
Jehovah tells young Samuel
to deliver a judgment message
against Eli’s house
because he has failed
to rebuke his wicked sons.
In chapter 4, Philistines
capture the ark of the covenant
at Israel’s army camp
and slay Eli’s two sons,
Hophni and Phinehas.
When 98-year-old Eli hears the news,
he falls backward and dies.
In chapters 5 through 7,
the Philistines return the ark to Israel
after suffering a series
of heavy punishments from Jehovah.
In the next chapter,
the Israelites faithlessly demand a king.
In chapter 9, Jehovah tells Samuel
to anoint Saul of the tribe
of Benjamin as leader of Israel.
Chapter 11 shows that Saul starts out well.
But before long, he becomes disobedient.
In chapter 13,
he presumptuously
offers up a burnt sacrifice.
In chapter 15, he defeats the Amalekites
but disobediently spares King Agag
and the best of the herd and the flock.
“To obey is better
than a sacrifice,” Samuel says.
He then tells Saul that God
has rejected him from being king.
In chapter 16, Samuel anoints David,
a son of Jesse, to be the next king.
In the next chapter, David,
with just a sling and a stone,
kills the giant Goliath,
a champion of the Philistines.
Chapter 18 records
the start of a lifelong friendship
between David and Saul’s son Jonathan.
Seeing David’s courage,
Saul puts him in charge of the fighting men.
David’s campaigns are so successful
that he receives more praise than Saul,
who becomes filled with murderous envy.
In chapter 19, David flees for his life,
remaining a fugitive until Saul’s death.
Did you know?
First Samuel has valuable lessons
about faith and obedience.
Eli and Saul disobeyed Jehovah
and came to a tragic end.
Samuel and David, however,
served God faithfully from their youth,
thus enjoying his blessing
throughout their lives.
In chapters 24 and 26,
David has opportunities to kill Saul,
but he refuses to harm Jehovah’s anointed.
In chapter 25,
Samuel dies and all Israel mourns.
David, now in the wilderness of Paran,
sends ten of his young men
to a wealthy sheep owner called Nabal
to ask for provisions.
When Nabal insolently refuses to help,
David prepares to take revenge.
However, Nabal’s wife, Abigail,
quickly goes to David
with provisions and averts tragedy.
In chapter 31, First Samuel closes
with the death of Saul and three of his sons,
who are buried under a tamarisk tree
in Jabesh-Gilead.
As you read First Samuel,
note how Eli and Saul
brought disgrace upon themselves,
see why Jehovah loved Samuel and David,
and read how God built
for David a lasting house,
which eventually led to the Messiah
—the King of God’s Kingdom.